once around supernova 1181.
Well, this story starts in the year 1181
on the 4th, 5th, or 6th of August. And
Chinese and Japanese astronomers noticed
what they called a guest star, a star
that had suddenly appeared in the sky
that wasn't on their star maps. And in
fact, there are eight separate texts
from that time that record the event.
It's not entirely clear from any of them
exactly where the star was in the sky.
But by combining all of them together,
we figure that it's inside the ellipse
marked in uh the red color on the
diagram there, somewhere inside that
ring is the area in question. It's uh
towards the north and it's slightly
north in fact of that zigzag pattern
which you may recognize because this is
one of the five observations
of a supernova
before the invention of the telescope
that's been subsequently confirmed and
that zigzag pattern well that is the
constellation of Cassiopia
and this particular event SN1 1181 1 was
visible in the sky as one of these guest
stars getting brighter and then fading
away slowly for about 6 months, 185
days. And that's a fairly typical
duration for one of these events.
When we look back now with a modern
telescope, in this case the 2.4 4 m kit
peak telescope
then we can see this amazing radial
pattern coming from a central region
here. Now this picture is in the
negative. So the bright regions are
showing as black. So the bright dots are
stars and we have this streaks of bright
matter coming away from the center.
And the region in question just uh above
the W of Cassiopia
is roughly where the blue cyan colored
region is with various uh different
constellation names from different uh
cultures marked on the map there and
different stick diagrams overlaid. And a
couple of things with red crosses that
might well have been and in fact have
been postulated as the exploding object
or the remnant associated with the
explosion. 3C58 and PA30 they're
indicated there. So 3C58
this is a radio source that was picked
up in the third Cambridge radio survey
using an instrument that sadly is no
longer there. and
the whole observatory upstixed and moved
to its current site at the the Malard
Radio Observatory south of Cambridge for
the 4C survey. But the 3C survey was
abandoned.
But it produced this this catalog and
number 58 in the catalog is a pulsar, a
neutron star rotating 15 times a second
and giving out X-rays and radio waves.
And there's a modern image zoomed in of
it on the right there. Now, the position
of this location has been pinned down
today with optical telescopes and high
resolution aperture synthesis radio
telescopes. But the 3C survey using the
wavelengths that it did and the
instrument that it did in the very early
days of radioastronomy wasn't able to
locate things uh to better than a degree
or so on the sky. So it could well have
been that 3C58 was lined up with the
position recorded by the Chinese and the
Japanese.
But when studied, we find that it
probably isn't because the age is wrong.
the radio flux coming from the the
emissions from the pulsar is declining
and that's a little difficult to
estimate the age from but you end up
with a figure around 3 and a half
thousand years and that's too long
these pulsars spinning around at the
moment it's spinning at 15 times a
second but they gradually spin down as
they radiate energy and angular momentum
away and so the spin down age comes
comes out even longer at 5,800.
And the temperature, well, neutron stars
lose heat over time, so they should
cool. And this seems to suggest an age
of around 5,000 years. So definitely too
old for SN1 1181 because that was only
about a,000 years ago. So this just
doesn't fit. We've also measured the
distance and it seems to be about 30%
too far away at 10,000 light years
compared to around about 7,000 8,000
that we have for SN1 1181. Now, it's
difficult to estimate the distance of a
nebula. So, there's a little bit of
uncertainty there.
The other object PA30 discovered in 2013
by Donna Patrick.
She was looking for
planetary nebula using the wise infrared
telescope. And the image of PA30 shown
on the right looks like a planetary
nebula. Um it's about the right size.
It's about the right sort of shape.
There's a central very blue star and a
ring of material expanding away from it.
Just what she was looking for.
But well, let's have a look.
So, Gia has measured the distance and
got 7 a half thousand light years. So,
that seems to be a good fit for the uh
supernova event.
It's bright in the infrared and you can
detect the optical component.
Here's another optical picture using
oxygen 3 and showing this lovely green
color as a result. showing that central
star with the material radiating away
from it. And in X-rays, the XMM Newton
telescope from the European Space Agency
and NASA's Chandra combined to produce
this image, showing a very hot central
region and a rather larger area of more
diffuse but very hot matter around it.
So that's perhaps not quite like a
planetary nebula. You don't normally see
quite such an extent of X-ray emissions.
And the X-ray emissions can tell us
things about the composition of the
nuclei that are present in the nebula.
And it reveals neon, magnesium, and
sulfur and silicon. All products of
later stages of fusion. Carbon carbon
fusion produces neon magnesium for
example.
But when you delve into this uh shell of
X-ray emitting matter in more detail,
you find there are two rings of X-rays
coming from it. An inner shock wave
where the termination of the stellar
wind coming from the central star is
being brought to a halt by it impacting
with the surrounding material. and an
outer ring where the outer traveling
ejector from the event is hitting the
interstellar medium and creating another
shock wave leading to another bit belt
of X-rays. And in between the two we
have a warm dust ring. And so this looks
like an expanding shock front and a very
hot central star.
And indeed the central star is immensely
hot. 200,000 Kelvin. One of the hottest
stars that we've ever seen. Hotter than
most typical white dwarfs. Those are
usually up to about 125,000 Kelvin, but
this is even hotter. And it has a very,
very powerful stellar wind coming away
at 16,000 kilometers/ second. When we
look at the spectrum, we don't see
hydrogen or helium. We see the outer
layers of the central star being carbon
and oxygen. And all of that points to
this being a super massive, highly
magnetic white dwarf star. So a star
that is got significant mass probably
heavier elements than carbon and oxygen
in the core and late stage in terms of
having lost all the hydrogen and helium
from the out side just due to that
extreme temperature.
Now we can also see the expanding shell
of material moving using the Doppler
effect and that gives us a speed of
expansion of around 1100 km/s
and that's good because you can work
backwards from the size and it works out
to be about a,000 years that this stuff
has been traveling and that's in good
agreement with the date of 1181
just about a thousand years ago. So it
seems highly probable that PA30 is the
result of the supernova event.
That's further confirmed by the fact
that X-ray studies show that we have
some uh medium weight metals present. In
particular, we can see the uh presence
of the decay chain of nickel 56 decaying
through cobalt down to iron. And you can
see the energy diagram here. Nickel 56
captures an electron, turns into a
series of excited states of 56 cobalt,
which capture another electron, and then
turns into iron 56 again through some
excited states down to the ground state.
So there's this energy ladder giving off
lots of energy as it goes. Now normally
the nickel 56 captures an electron with
a halflife of around 6 6 and 1/2 days
and it's responsible for the very strong
peak in the spectrum of a
type 1A supernova. You can see where it
says Ni at the top of the light curve
there. That is the nickel 56 uh
responsible for the energy output there.
And then that decays quite quickly and
then the decay slows down as we get to
cobalt and the cobalt decay takes longer
77 days to decay to iron. So the curve
declines less rapidly.
But in this particular object what we're
observing is such a high temperature
that the nickel present is completely
ionized. All the electrons have been
stripped off. So there are no electrons
orbiting close to the nucleus for it to
capture. And so instead of 6 days, that
electron capture reaction is taking
hundreds of years and slowing down the
power output um of the radioactive decay
chain here by significant amount causing
a completely unusual curve in the decay
of the light coming from the event which
definitely makes it look very unusual.
not a typical type 1A supernova at all.
Now, we also find that the explosion is
asymmetric.
There are red shifted filaments on one
side that are brighter than the blue
shifted filaments on the other side. And
this suggests that there was perhaps a
merger as the trigger. And in the
merger, the uh resulting explosion
has ejected the residual star in one
direction away from the nebula and it's
moving through it. But there are other
possibilities.
That merger just could have been of two
white dwarf stars. Perhaps what they
were different. One of them being an
ordinary carbon oxygen white dwarf lower
mass and a slightly more massive oxygen
neon magnesium containing star and that
would explain some of the elements in
the spectrum that we see and uh perhaps
that's really what's been going on. So
when these white dwarfs explode the type
1A supernova, the normal explanation is
given that they accrete mass and that
can usually be from a binary pair. One
of them evolves into a white dwarf
quicker than the other because it's more
massive. The second one catches up and
can um turn into a giant, lose mass. The
giant has relatively weak grip on its
outer layers and so some of it spirals
onto the white dwarf and indeed the
result can be that uh that then tips it
over the Chandraa limit or sometimes you
end up with the entire envelope being
stripped away into a disc and then what
can happen is that the white dwarfs can
orbit each other and spiral down and
merge.
But this isn't quite the whole story
because in fact it you don't have to
wait for the Chandra Seca limit.
Just below the Chandra Seca limit, just
1% below it, we think that conditions
depending on what the star is made of
can reach the point where carbon can
start to undergo a runaway fusion
reaction liberating vast amounts of
energy. Now they at the chandra sacred
limit this probably happens but it can
happen just before it as well. And what
happens is that two carbons combine to
make magnesium and some other elements.
The first thing they do is make an
excited magnesium atom or nucleus with a
little bit of extra energy. So you get
126 carbon plus 126 carbon makes 2412
magnesium with that extra energy. That's
what the little star at the top there
means in blue. And that dumps the energy
by nuclear decay. And there are five
different paths. The simplest one is for
it to just dump the energy as a gamma
ray and make 2412 unexited magnesium.
It can split up leaving 168 oxygen and
two helium nuclei alpha particles 42 ag
or it can split into a neon nucleus 2010
nee and one alpha particle 42 helium
or it can spit out a proton and turn
into 2311 sodium and that's where quite
a lot of the sodium in the world comes
from or it can spit out a neutron on and
turn into a slightly light version of
magnesium 2312 magnesium. So there's a
number of different pathways and these
manufacture from the carbon those other
elements neon and magnesium being two of
the common ones some sodium and some
oxygen but there was probably oxygen
present already in these uh carbon
oxygen cores. So that can happen and
that accounts for why we see uh some of
these elements the neon and the
magnesium particularly in the spectra.
Now that's important when we have a
think about these stars blowing up
because sometimes
instead of a traditional type 1A
supernova we see an event called a type
1A X. These are the explosions of white
dwarf stars that don't completely
destroy the star. They are subluminous.
They don't emit in as much light as a
traditional type 1A. Now, they're not
very common and in fact PA30 looks like
the remnant of the of a 1AX event and
perhaps the only one that we know in our
galaxy. We found a few candidates for
this in other galaxies, but this one's
far nearer and much easier to study.
Now, one of the other ways that these
type 1A X events can occur is by helium
accretion.
So, normally
you would have a binary system where
hydrogen from the outer layer, unused
hydrogen from the outer layer of the
giant companion spirals over onto the
white dwarf and triggers a type 1A
supernova.
But if the companion star is not a
traditional
red giant star, but something hotter and
more violent like a wolf ray star where
it's already got rid of all of its
hydrogen, then it's possible that as
that comes to the end of its life, it is
helium that flows over onto the white
dwarf companion and that can have a
different effect.
Instead of just accumulating and maybe
occasionally there being nova bursts of
hydrogen turning into helium, you can
reach the point where you get
sufficiently hot that helium itself
starts to fuse and you get two heliums
making a burillium and another helium
then making carbon and then another
helium making oxygen. So suddenly you
can release a lot of energy by consuming
several helium nuclei and fusing up to
make more carbon and more oxygen.
Now that can produce a very powerful
nova event
that is not sufficiently powerful to
disrupt the entire core of the star.
That would only happen if the carbon and
oxygen started undergoing fusion
themselves. right throughout the core.
But this can happen to the helium that
is accumulated and uh is being fed by
the companion.
The normal hydrogen runaway in a typical
situation where there's hydrogen present
does produce nova events. They're quite
bright, but they're nowhere near as
powerful as you would get from the uh
result here. the helium event is going
to be delayed because it's much harder
to trigger the helium fusion reaction.
Takes a lot more extreme conditions and
so the buildup has got to go a lot
further before it will do this uh
particular job and suddenly consume all
the helium in a very violent event. And
that may well be the result or the cause
of these type 1A x supernovi.
Now, as I said, the uh other thing that
XMM Newton showed was that we did have
the presence in the nebula of
neon and magnesium, but we also saw
heavier elements, silicon and sulfur,
and those are evidence of yet further
fusion reactions. So 24 magnesium plus
an alpha particle, a helium nucleus
makes 2814 silicon and some gamma
radiation and energy.
And you can take two oxygen atoms and if
you smash those together hard enough,
you can make 3216 sulfur and again gamma
rays and energy. And it it suggests that
in PA30's case, we've already gone to
this stage and seen these. Plus, we have
the evidence of yet further isotopes
being made, including that nickel 56,
which may well be evidence that there
have been a a very powerful amount of
fusion going on here.
And so you can get one of these very
violent
nova events. as I'm going to call them a
type 1A X explosion
that doesn't destroy the star that does
create a supersonic shock wave
creating fusion in the nebula itself of
the matter that's been hurled outwards
creating elements going up the periodic
table neon magnesium things like uh
silicon sulfur and even a little bit of
the metals nickel and iron iron can
result, but it doesn't destroy the
entire core of the star. What it tends
to do is give that a very big kick and
that can hurl the zombie star out away
from the explosion at high speed. And we
often see these hyper velocity white
dwarf cores traveling at very great
speeds that don't seem to make any other
sense. So, these are probably zombie
stars.
Zombie because they've been brought back
from the dead. The supernova explosion
should have destroyed them. And possibly
what is happening is that you then get
material from the
expelled nebula falling back and
rettreting onto the zombie core, waking
it up again.
But what can happen there is that those
heavier elements sink and the heaviest
ones are the densest densest nuclei sink
to the core. And as they do so they
might build an iron core white dwarf,
very rare star indeed.
And uh these would be much smaller and
much denser than typical carbon oxygen
white dwarfs which might be half a solar
mass the size of the Earth or oxygen
neon magnesium white dwarf stars which
might be just over one solar mass and
considerably smaller than the Earth. But
these might be very very dense white
dwarf stars indeed. And so PA30, its
central star, may indeed be the first
discovery of a zombie star. And that's
where I want to leave this one. We might
talk more about zombie stars and indeed
stars with iron cores that don't
collapse later on in another video. But
thanks very much for listening to this
one.